README.md, before:

---
description: >-
  This book documents the engineering process in the Ampersand project. To
  maximize the relevance to contributors, we have organized the text per tool.
---

# Introduction

## Introduction

In the early days of the development of Ampersand, it was a single person's project. Haskell was used as programming language, and the source code was kept on a single PC. Fortunately, things have evolved. Now we have a team, and we use quite a lot of open source tooling to help us along. The downside is that not everybody in the team knows all there is to know about the tooling. The purpose of this guide is to help out. It will also be a great place to start for new team members.

The [up to date version of this book](http://ampersandtarski.gitbooks.io/the-tools-we-use-for-ampersand/) is published automatically every time a commit is done to the master branch.

## Specific tools used in the Ampersand project

| Tool | Purpose \(the hyperlink navigates to the section in this book\) | Knowledge holder |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| [Ampersand image](https://hub.docker.com/r/ampersandtarski/ampersand-prototype/) | a docker-image in which we keep the latest version of the Ampersand compiler in executable form | all |
| [Ampersand repository](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand/) | a [repository](gitbook/getting-started-with-gitbook.md) in which we keep Ampersand source code and manage the issues wrt Ampersand | all |
| [Appveyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/hanjoosten/ampersand) | a service that [releases the Ampersand compiler](git/releasing-ampersand-and-workflow-details.md) automatically, provided all automated tests have passed | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/u/ampersandtarski/) | a repository in which we keep [Ampersand images](installation-of-rap/making-docker-images.md) | [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [GitBook](https://www.ou.nl/-/IM0403_Rule-Based-Design) | a repository in which we keep [Ampersand Documentation](gitbook/) | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan) |
| [GitHub](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/) | a project in which we keep all Ampersand git-repos | all |
| [RAP3](http://ampersand.tarski.nl/RAP3/) | a [web-based application](functionality-of-rap3/) for the public at large to use Ampersand | [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [RAP-repo](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/RAP/) | a Github repository in which we keep the [source code of RAP applications](installation-of-rap/) | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [Rule Based Design](https://www.ou.nl/-/IM0403_Rule-Based-Design) | an Ampersand Course | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Rogier](https://github.com/rvandewetering) |
| [Travis](https://travis-ci.org/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand) | a service, which runs automated tests on every commit of the Ampersand repository on Github \(the origin\). | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |

## Generic tools used in the Ampersand project

| Tool | Purpose | Knowledge holder |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) | the platform for technology agnostic, fully automated deployment of Ampersand and applications developed in Ampersand. | [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [git](https://git-scm.com/community) | the versioning system in which all source code is kept | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Rieks](https://github.com/RieksJ), [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s), [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Martijn](https://github.com/Oblosys), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten) |
| [Graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/) | a system for generating diagrams, which is used to generate conceptual models and data models as part of the documentation generator. | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) | the programming language in which the Ampersand compiler is built | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten), [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [JSON](https://www.json.org/) | a simple, standardized, format for communicating data structures. It is used to communicate data from the Ampersand-compiler to the generated application. | Han, Michiel |
| [MariaDB](https://mariadb.org/) | the database that is used by Ampersand for persistency | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten) |
| [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) | the language in which Ampersand documentation is written | all |
| [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) | the language in which an Ampersand Prototype is generated | [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s) |
| [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) | the package manager for JavaScript, which guarantees consistency of module dependencies in the JavaScript world. | [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s) |
| [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) | a system for document translation and markup, which we use to create a host of different document formats | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Stack](https://www.haskellstack.org/) | the installation environment for Haskell, which guarantees consistency of module dependencies within the Haskell world. | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Martijn](https://github.com/Oblosys) |
| [VS-code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) | an editor for development of Ampersand and Ampersand-projects | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Rieks](https://github.com/RieksJ) |

## Working Principles

* The Ampersand project produces free open source software, available to everyone.
* We respect the intellectual contribution of all. We wish to keep it that way by acknowledging intellectual ownership whereever appropriate.
* We write software for maintainability, to facilitate others to contribute. This implies simplicity and understandibility of all software artifacts. It means we document code to be relevant \(for new team members\), complete \(for finding everything you need\), and minimal \(to save readers some reading effort\). It implies we reuse code and strive for orthogonal design.
* We automate the production of software to the max, to obtain robust and fast deployments and save ourselves repeated work.
* When in trouble, we write an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand/). We diagnose each problem before suggesting solutions. The diagnosis is documented on Github by means of comments to the issue. Once an issue is closed, we edit the issue to minimize text and focus on the correct diagnosis.
* We accept the consequences of being "under construction" all the time.
* We believe in a formal foundation of software engineering.

## Contributions to the documentation

If you have anything to fix or details to add, just post a comment next to the paragraph. We really appreciate if you do so, because our readers know best what it is they are looking for in the docs.

You can do that by clicking the '+' icon that appears when you hover above the paragraph. Don't be shy! Try it out!

## Licence

Unless otherwise specified, everything in this repository is covered by the following licence:

![Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-sa/4.0/88x31.png)

_**Ampersand Documentation**_ by the [the Ampersand team](http://www.gitbook.com/@ampersandtarski/) is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

Based on a work at [https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/TheToolsWeUse](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/TheToolsWeUse)

Commit message:

Include a reference to the Ampersand Documentation
This tools documentation is the default when you go to `https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/`. People that end up here but just want to start using ampersand may well be interested in the documentation of Ampersand itself and how to install the stuff for creating protoyptes etc. I added a paragraph for users of this kind.

README.md, after:

---
description: >-
  This book documents the engineering process in the Ampersand project. To
  maximize the relevance to contributors, we have organized the text per tool.
---

# Introduction

## Introduction

In the early days of the development of Ampersand, it was a single person's project. Haskell was used as programming language, and the source code was kept on a single PC. Fortunately, things have evolved. Now we have a team, and we use quite a lot of open source tooling to help us along. The downside is that not everybody in the team knows all there is to know about the tooling. The purpose of this guide is to help out. It will also be a great place to start for new team members.

The [up to date version of this book](http://ampersandtarski.gitbooks.io/the-tools-we-use-for-ampersand/) is published automatically every time a commit is done to the master branch.

Documentation on actually using Ampersand - e.g. for making and running prototypes (including the ways to install on your computer what it takes to do so) - is in another document, called [Ampersand Documentation](https://ampersandtarski.gitbook.io/documentation/)

## Specific tools used in the Ampersand project

| Tool | Purpose \(the hyperlink navigates to the section in this book\) | Knowledge holder |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| [Ampersand image](https://hub.docker.com/r/ampersandtarski/ampersand-prototype/) | a docker-image in which we keep the latest version of the Ampersand compiler in executable form | all |
| [Ampersand repository](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand/) | a [repository](gitbook/getting-started-with-gitbook.md) in which we keep Ampersand source code and manage the issues wrt Ampersand | all |
| [Appveyor](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/hanjoosten/ampersand) | a service that [releases the Ampersand compiler](git/releasing-ampersand-and-workflow-details.md) automatically, provided all automated tests have passed | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/u/ampersandtarski/) | a repository in which we keep [Ampersand images](installation-of-rap/making-docker-images.md) | [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [GitBook](https://www.ou.nl/-/IM0403_Rule-Based-Design) | a repository in which we keep [Ampersand Documentation](gitbook/) | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan) |
| [GitHub](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/) | a project in which we keep all Ampersand git-repos | all |
| [RAP3](http://ampersand.tarski.nl/RAP3/) | a [web-based application](functionality-of-rap3/) for the public at large to use Ampersand | [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [RAP-repo](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/RAP/) | a Github repository in which we keep the [source code of RAP applications](installation-of-rap/) | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [Rule Based Design](https://www.ou.nl/-/IM0403_Rule-Based-Design) | an Ampersand Course | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Esther](https://github.com/EstherHageraats), [Lloyd](https://github.com/LloydRutledge), [Rogier](https://github.com/rvandewetering) |
| [Travis](https://travis-ci.org/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand) | a service, which runs automated tests on every commit of the Ampersand repository on Github \(the origin\). | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |

## Generic tools used in the Ampersand project

| Tool | Purpose | Knowledge holder |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) | the platform for technology agnostic, fully automated deployment of Ampersand and applications developed in Ampersand. | [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten) |
| [git](https://git-scm.com/community) | the versioning system in which all source code is kept | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Rieks](https://github.com/RieksJ), [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s), [Hidde-Jan](https://github.com/hidde-jan), [Martijn](https://github.com/Oblosys), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten) |
| [Graphviz](https://www.graphviz.org/) | a system for generating diagrams, which is used to generate conceptual models and data models as part of the documentation generator. | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) | the programming language in which the Ampersand compiler is built | [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten), [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [JSON](https://www.json.org/) | a simple, standardized, format for communicating data structures. It is used to communicate data from the Ampersand-compiler to the generated application. | Han, Michiel |
| [MariaDB](https://mariadb.org/) | the database that is used by Ampersand for persistency | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s), [Stef](https://github.com/stefjoosten), [Sebastiaan](https://github.com/sjcjoosten) |
| [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) | the language in which Ampersand documentation is written | all |
| [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) | the language in which an Ampersand Prototype is generated | [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s) |
| [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) | the package manager for JavaScript, which guarantees consistency of module dependencies in the JavaScript world. | [Michiel](https://github.com/Michiel-s) |
| [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) | a system for document translation and markup, which we use to create a host of different document formats | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten) |
| [Stack](https://www.haskellstack.org/) | the installation environment for Haskell, which guarantees consistency of module dependencies within the Haskell world. | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Martijn](https://github.com/Oblosys) |
| [VS-code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) | an editor for development of Ampersand and Ampersand-projects | [Han](https://github.com/hanjoosten), [Rieks](https://github.com/RieksJ) |

## Working Principles

* The Ampersand project produces free open source software, available to everyone.
* We respect the intellectual contribution of all. We wish to keep it that way by acknowledging intellectual ownership whereever appropriate.
* We write software for maintainability, to facilitate others to contribute. This implies simplicity and understandibility of all software artifacts. It means we document code to be relevant \(for new team members\), complete \(for finding everything you need\), and minimal \(to save readers some reading effort\). It implies we reuse code and strive for orthogonal design.
* We automate the production of software to the max, to obtain robust and fast deployments and save ourselves repeated work.
* When in trouble, we write an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/Ampersand/). We diagnose each problem before suggesting solutions. The diagnosis is documented on Github by means of comments to the issue. Once an issue is closed, we edit the issue to minimize text and focus on the correct diagnosis.
* We accept the consequences of being "under construction" all the time.
* We believe in a formal foundation of software engineering.

## Contributions to the documentation

If you have anything to fix or details to add, just post a comment next to the paragraph. We really appreciate if you do so, because our readers know best what it is they are looking for in the docs.

You can do that by clicking the '+' icon that appears when you hover above the paragraph. Don't be shy! Try it out!

## Licence

Unless otherwise specified, everything in this repository is covered by the following licence:

![Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-sa/4.0/88x31.png)

_**Ampersand Documentation**_ by the [the Ampersand team](http://www.gitbook.com/@ampersandtarski/) is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

Based on a work at [https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/TheToolsWeUse](https://github.com/AmpersandTarski/TheToolsWeUse)
